Text:
Victory to Manasa, Jagat Gauri, Bishahari
Supremely beautiful on eight snake heads.
Her royal throne and royal bed are both upon the snakes --
She takes her seat especially on the Mangala python.
Angry and full of poison, she is moving on her way;
The wicked merchant Chand Sadagar looks at her askance
From the corner of his eyes, and twisting his beard
He takes a club of hetal wood and puts it on his shoulder.
And Bishahari got to hear about it straight away --
In a fury she snatched away the six sons of Chand,
And six dead sons meant six young widows.
Never in his life had he offered so much as a tiny flower,
Yet the singers are singing in honey-sweet tones,
And everybody on the battlefield worships
The one-eyed fish-head goddess!

Look at the precious youngest son named Lakhindar!
Lets go to Chanpainagar and arrange for his marriage.
The merchant Amulya lives at Champainagar --
The daughter of his house is the dancer Behula.
Old Janardhan is on his way to negotiate the match -
After fixing it all up the old rascal died.
After the marriage Lakhindar comes back in palanquin:
The town of Chand Sadagar is full of wedding music.
On the Santali Mountain the bridal room was made of iron --
There Lakhindar, tired out, lay down and slept.

Through the thread-like hole Kalini (snake) slipped inside.
Seeing Lakhindar's beauty, she hesitated a moment,
Wondering: where shall I bite such a beautiful body?
If the gods call me to account, what shall I answer?
In his sleep Lakhindar turned for comfort on his other side
And accidentally touched the snake on its back:
"You gods above, Surya and Chandra, you are my witnesses --
Without any provocation the merchant kicked me on the back!"

And with these two witnesses, Kalini bites Lakhindar.
At the burning of the poison, young Lakhindar jumps up:
"O my Lady, the merchant's daughter, wake up and see --
A dire sleep has come on you, and what has bitten me?
Tearing off her sari end, the bride lit up the lamp:
"Why has my Lord collapsed on this blackest night?
And she threw the betel_cutters at the disappearing snake,
Cutting of its tail two inches from the end.

The servant, Nera, rushed and told Sadagar:
"Listen, Master, your son has died!"
"A good thing too my son has died!"
And lifting his hands up high he began to dance:
"As soon as night has changed to dawn,
I shall eat baked fish and last night's warmed-up rice."

"Then, father, leave this house and may a 
Thunderbolt hit your head!
Have you nothing better to do than to quarrel with Manasa?
Take back these conch-shell bangles and the sari
which you gave me.
And now fix up a raft for me of benana trunk.

Cut a single ram banana tree into three pieces,
And piercing this with bamboo poles she sailed away.
Then came the six brothers of the bride,
Saying, "O sister, beloved of our hearts!
Why are you sailing on the waters with a dead husband?"

"I can't stay any longer in my parent's house --
There will be constant quarrels with my sister-in-law.
I have become a child widow at this unhappy age --
Think, how many vegitarian pots and pans I shall throw away!"
Thus consoling her brothers, she floated on her way.

She crosses Champatala and Beltala
And at Gadaghat the body paused rocking on the waves.
Gadadhar was fishing in the waters of the Ganguri,
He never eats his rice without rui fish,
His legs are swollen with phalaria and he has a
tumor on his neck,
His rods and hooks are set out all around him.
Seeing the young lady, Gada smiles:
"Tell me young lady, where is your home?"

"Ashes on your face, Gada, ashes on your face!
I am the servant of Mother Manasa, floating on the waters.
By fixing my mind on the feet of Mother Manasa,
My purpose is to bring my dead husband back to life."

Thus putting Gada in his place, she floats on her way.
And so she crossed Gadaghat and Baidyaghat,
And Chingridaha and Boaldaha,
And again at Tamlukghat the body rocked upon the waves.
Nitai the washerwoman was washing clothes at Tamluk ghat.
Her two children Dhona and Mona have been 
put to sleep on the ghat,
While she herself washes clothes on the river bank at Tamluk.
The clothes washed by Nitai become just like kanchra flowers.
But the clothes washed by Behula shine like the sun.
Taking these clothes, Behula went to heaven:
She asked for a boon from Brahma, Vishnu and Siva.

"We'll grant you the boon, daughter, we'll grant
it you for certain:
Take your six brothers-in-law and your husband
and go back to your father-in-law."

Seven boats were decked out with joy of the heart.
After getting her husband back alive, Behula went back home:
The boats were carried on the backs of snakes.

The worship of Manasa begins with the sacrifice of a swan:
Ordinary flower offerings float away on the water.
But the flower-offerings of Chand Sadagar
go dry on the Jata of Siva.
