Text:
We all got together and installed a mechanical husking machine in the village. The women got their independence, telling their husbands: "How we suffered grinding the paddy by pressing on the husking lever -- now our sorrows will fly away, a good thing for the home -- we will only have to pay the machine attendant. The new marriage law has been passed. Now those who already have a husband, and widows can remarry: The mother of three or four children says: "I want to get married again -- why should I stay in your house? What happiness can a fellow like you give me?

You can't provide me clothes and soap! Now I shall go back to my father. I shall get married after selecting a new bridegroom. I shall wear spectacles on my nose and shoes on my feet, and live happily ever after.

Here there's so much misery -- what more can I say? How much more can I stand? How can I put up with the anger of my mother-in-law and sister-in-law?

If the mother and sister of my new husband are thorns on my path, I shall wear sandal-shoes on my feet. When I get married I shall have peace in my new husband's house.

On the word of his wife, someone quarrels with his father: "Why do you speak to my wife, father, she is a good talker! You wicked old rascal, get out of my house this very day! That'll cure your complaints".

"Listen, my son -- let me be forgiven by her: If I speak to her again, you may punish me".

The daughter-in-law is still roaring with anger: "Listen, Lord of my heart, if I ask the old lady to do anything, the old man gives the answer!"

At his wife's words, the favorite son is going to beat the old man. So the old fellow runs and falls down near the feet of his daughter-in-law: "Save me, Mother Chandi, I admit my mistake, and I hold your feet". Now it seems that the pitri-danda will make the father die. 

This is the kind of self-rule prevailing in the country since Independence. After father and son have quarreled with each other, the son hangs himself and dies. There are disturbances in every house day and night because of the women. In the criminal court ninety percent of the cases are due to women.